---
category: reference
citekey: @Nair2012
stage: planning
year: 2012
---


# CARRS Surveillance study: Design and methods to assess burdens from multiple perspectives

%% begin tags %%

%% end tags %%

> [!tip]  
> **Zotero** = [Nair et al_2012_CARRS Surveillance study.pdf](zotero://select/library/items/5X5SFF6L)
> **Citation Key** = @Nair2012

> [!cite]
> Nair, M., Ali, M. K., Ajay, V. S., Shivashankar, R., Mohan, V., Pradeepa, R., Deepa, M., Khan, H. M., Kadir, M. M., Fatmi, Z. A., Reddy, K. S., Tandon, N., Narayan, K. M. V., & Prabhakaran, D. (2012). CARRS Surveillance study: Design and methods to assess burdens from multiple perspectives. _BMC Public Health_, _12_(1), 1. [https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-701](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-701)


## Abstract
Background: Cardio-metabolic diseases (CMDs) are a growing public health problem, but data on incidence, trends, and costs in developing countries is scarce. Comprehensive and standardised surveillance for non-communicable diseases was recommended at the United Nations High-level meeting in 2011. Aims: To develop a model surveillance system for CMDs and risk factors that could be adopted for continued assessment of burdens from multiple perspectives in South-Asian countries. Methods. Design: Hybrid model with two cross-sectional serial surveys three years apart to monitor trend, with a three-year prospective follow-up of the first cohort. Sites: Three urban settings (Chennai and New Delhi in India; Karachi in Pakistan), 4000 participants in each site stratified by gender and age. Sampling methodology: Multi-stage cluster random sampling; followed by within-household participant selection through a combination of Health Information National Trends Study (HINTS) and Kish methods. Culturally-appropriate and methodologically-relevant data collection instruments were developed to gather information on CMDs and their risk factors; quality of life, health-care utilisation and costs, along with objective measures of anthropometric, clinical and biochemical parameters. The cohort follow-up is designed as a pilot study to understand the feasibility of estimating incidence of risk factors, disease events, morbidity, and mortality. Results: The overall participant response rate in the first cross-sectional survey was 94.1% (Chennai 92.4%, n=4943; Delhi 95.7%, n=4425; Karachi 94.3%, n=4016). 51.8% of the participants were females, 61.6%<45years, 27.5% 45-60years and 10.9% >60years. Discussion. This surveillance model will generate data on prevalence and trends; help study the complex life-course patterns of CMDs, and provide a platform for developing and testing interventions and tools for prevention and control of CMDs in South-Asia. It will also help understanding the challenges and opportunities in establishing a surveillance system across countries. © 2012 Nair et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.


# Annotations
%% begin annotations %%  
  
  
%% end annotations %%

# Notes
%% begin notes %%

%% end notes %%

%% Import Date: 2024-01-16T11:26:28.618-06:00 %%
