---
date: 2024-04-17
category: temporary
stage: considering
tags:
  - todo
  
---

Derek Dosdall, PhD is a collaborator with [Ravi-Ranjan-MD-PhD](../permanent/Ravi-Ranjan-MD-PhD.md) at [University-of-Utah-research](../permanent/University-of-Utah-research.md). 

He is a researcher at Utah, with multiple NIH grants. The profile below is from [the website](https://cvrti.utah.edu/dosdall-cvrti-investigator/):

> Dr. Dosdall completed his BS in electrical engineering at BYU followed by MS and PhD degrees in bioengineering from Arizona State University. He completed postdoctoral training in cardiac electrophysiology research at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. After joining the faculty at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, Dr. Dosdall was recruited to the University of Utah where he is an Associate Professor of Surgery with the Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery and the Associate Director at the Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute.

> Dr. Dosdall has always been fascinated by medical technology. His research focuses on the interface between engineering and medicine to develop translational technologies and devices to understand heart problems and develop treatments to improve quality and duration of life. He has studied cardiac arrythmias such as atrial and ventricular fibrillation to understand the causes dangerous arrythmias and to develop novel treatments such as pacing, defibrillation, and ablation therapies. He also has developed preclinical models of heart problems for testing treatments and drugs to help patients.


# Grants

R01 = Antitachycardia pacing and improved lead for ventricular conduction system stimulation

> Nodal dysfunction in patients often requires the implantation of a pacemaker to maintain physiologically normal heart rates. Historically, a pacemaker in the right ventricular apex has delivered pacing pulses to the ventricles. In some patients, chronic pacing in the right ventricle may lead to ventricular dyssynchrony, pacing induced cardiomyopathy, and increased congestive heart failure incidence. Biventricular pacing has been shown to lead to improved performance compared to right ventricular pacing, but up to 1/3 of patients are non-responders to biventricular pacing. Permanent His bundle and left bundle branch (LBB) pacing has recently been shown to lead to less heart failure and improved synchronicity, with a trend towards a mortality benefit as compared to the standard right ventricular or biventricular lead placement. Limitations that have slowed the adoption of His bundle pacing include 1) higher pacing thresholds as compared to other lead configurations, which may reduce battery life in implanted devices for patients with high pacing demand, and 2) a lack of selectivity in sensing and pacing the His bundle and adjacent ventricular myocardium. Therapies such as antitachycardia pacing (ATP) that utilize sensing may be less effective if the His activation and the local myocardial activations lead to inappropriate calculation of the ventricular tachycardia (VT) cycle length. ATP is an effective technique to terminate ventricular tachycardias without delivering high-energy, painful shocks. However, efficacy of ATP techniques with a His bundle or LBB lead has not been demonstrated. Using a canine model of ischemia-reperfusion induced VT, the hypothesis will be tested that ATP will utilize the His-Purkinje network to terminate VT with greater efficacy than standard right ventricular lead ATP therapy. A novel, transvenous, multielectrode pacing lead is proposed that will allow for low threshold, selective sensing and pacing of the His bundle and the adjacent ventricular myocardium. Refinement of the lead configuration will be performed in ex vivo canine hearts, and validation of the new lead will be demonstrated in an in vivo, chronic dog model. The lead configuration will be deployable with currently available tools and techniques and will allow the physician to optimize the pacing therapy based on the response of individual patients. Completion of this project will lead to a substantially improved lead system for His bundle pacing and LBB applications and demonstrate the effectiveness of ATP therapy with His bundle and LBB leads. This translational project may have an immediate impact on pacemaker implantation for many of the one million patients worldwide that are implanted with pacemakers each year.

R01 = Novel Gene Therapy For Chronic Ischemic Heart Failure

> Heart failure (HF) is the major cardiac syndrome and treating chronic HFis an unmet need in the United States and worldwide. Therapeutic options for advanced heart failure target systemic stress pathways and sur- prisingly few therapies exist that directly target failing heart muscle. Our long-term goal is to use our under- standing of the biology of failing myocardium to develop muscle specific therapeutic solutions. The key patho- logical hallmark of HF is an abnormal calcium transient, impairing both contraction and relaxation. In small ani- mals and humans, cardiac bridging integrator 1 (cBIN1), which organizes calcium microdomains and the cal- cium handling machinery, is diminished in both systolic and diastolic heart failure. In these rodent models of HF, cBIN1-microdomains are disrupted and can be normalized by cBIN1 gene therapy for functional rescue and reduction in arrhythmogenic incidence. Whether the observed HF rescue by cBIN1 gene therapy in rodent models of HF can be translated to human patients requires a preclinical step in large animals. A validated ca- nine model of ischemia induced HF will be used to understand key regulators of T-tubules and sarcoplasmic reticulum microdomains, restore function, and improve mortlity in failing hearts. The overall objective of this application is to test a cBIN1 gene therapy in a preclinical large animal model of ischemic HF. Our central hypothesis is that in a canine model of ischemia induced HF, adeno asso- ciate virus 9 (AAV9)-transduced exogenous cBIN1 restores functional contractility and reduces arrhythmogenic substrate. The central hypothesis will be tested by accomplishing two aims: Specific Aim 1) Determine in a canine model of ischemic heart failure whether cBIN1 gene therapy provides a functional and mortality benefit. In vivo echocardiography, invasive hemodynamics, and serum biomarkers of cardiac stress and remodeling (NT-proBNP, cBIN1 score), will be monitored after cBIN1 therapy. Specific Aim 2) Determine in a canine model of ischemic heart failure whether cBIN1 gene therapy reduces arrhythmic events and substrate develop- ment. Continuous telemetrically recorded ECG monitoring, electroanatomical endocardial mapping and VT in- ducibility testing, and mapping of cardiac activation, intracellular calcium, and transmembrane voltage will be performed to determine the effectiveness of cBIN1 gene therapy in reducing the arrhythmogenic substrate. It is anticipated that this cBIN1 gene therapy will be the first therapy in medicine that directly targets and reverses the cellular remodeling in the myocytes of failing hearts, rescuing cardiac function, provides a mortal- ity benefit, and reduces arrhythmias prevalent in ischemic HF. This proposal will explore the effectiveness of this therapy in a highly relevant pre-clinical ischemic HF model and move this therapy from a promising lab finding closer to clinical realization.