---
date: 2024-02-10
category: structure
stage: factoring
tags:
  - grants
  - research
---

I will apply for the K23 award sometime in 2025 and/or 2026. 
This should be a continuation of my [T32-and-F32-research-years](T32-and-F32-research-years.md) in terms of topics. 
As its a training grant, the areas of research need to be somewhat innovative but more importantly have areas to be trained in.

I will need to build off of strengths from previous research mentors and the institution and new/active mentors. 
Particularly, I will need to capitalize on the [University-of-Utah-research](University-of-Utah-research.md) research opportunities.

Notes: 
- Aims and drafts of aims are in [K23-aims](K23-aims.md)
- Relevant literature for review in [K23-background](K23-background.md) 
- Potential dataset information and descriptions in[K23-data](K23-data.md)

# Big hairy audacious goal

The __BHAG__, as described by [Emelia-J-Benjamin-MD-ScM](Emelia-J-Benjamin-MD-ScM.md) from the AFGen fellowship, is the big picture that I need to be working towards in my research efforts.
My area of interest is in how stress can precipitate arrhythmia.
Stress physiology is complex, and involves the entirety of the neurocardiac axis. 
What I want to focus on is how, mechanistically, stress changes electrophysiological properties locally and how that leads to a propensity for arrhythmia.

My focus is more so on AF as a model disease, as it has multiple "flavors" (vagally-mediated, adrenergically-mediated, etc), multiple phenotypes, and fits well with the *Coumel's triangle* of arrhythmology.
I will have to be more specific at the level of a K23 award, but it should be focused on the above __BHAG__.

# Mentorship, Coaching, and Sponsorship

I have started developing a research and mentorship network that will be critical for this project. I will need a key sponsor to "fund" my work, and other field-specific mentors.

- [Amit-J-Shah-MD-MS](Amit-J-Shah-MD-MS.md) 
- [Alvaro-Alonso-MD-PhD](Alvaro-Alonso-MD-PhD.md)
- [Emelia-J-Benjamin-MD-ScM](Emelia-J-Benjamin-MD-ScM.md)
- [Dawood-Darbar-MD-MBChB](Dawood-Darbar-MD-MBChB.md)
- [Ravi-Ranjan-MD-PhD](Ravi-Ranjan-MD-PhD.md)

# Potential Projects

- Association of PTSD with AF and future AF risk
	- PTSD as the type of patients
	- Works for a CDA award for VA very well
	- May be able to incorporate EP study 
	- Genetics of PTSD as markers for future AF risk as an Mendelian randomization study