---
date: 2024-02-12
category: reference
stage: working
tags:
  - mentorship
  - arrhythmia
  - electrophysiology
  - computational
  - machine_learning
---

Researcher and clinical EP at [University-of-Utah-research](University-of-Utah-research.md). 
Also worked with [Benjamin-Steinberg-MD](../temporary/Benjamin-Steinberg-MD.md)

From the [website](https://cvrti.utah.edu/the-ranjan-laboratory/), 

> Ravi Ranjan, M.D., Ph.D., is a cardiologist specializing in cardiac electrophysiology. His clinical interests include ablation of complex cardiac arrhythmias like atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardias and supra-ventricular tachycardias. He also has keen interest in cardiac device based therapy like cardiac resynchronization therapy, ICDs and pacemakers. He has been a faculty member at the University of Utah since 2010 and is a tenured Professor of Medicine. He received his medical degree from Harvard Medical School, completed an internal medicine residency at Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, a cardiology fellowship at Johns Hopkins Hospital and a cardiac electrophysiology fellowship at Johns Hopkins Hospital. Dr. Ranjan has built a large clinical cardiology and electrophysiology practice in Utah.


# Grants

## K23 = MRI-based visualization and acute targeting of gaps in atrial ablation lesions

> This proposal describes a five-year training program to develop an academic career in cardiac electrophysiology. The principal investigator has a long-standing interest in cardiac electrophysiology research. Over the course of this grant, the applicant will obtain the training and funding to become an independent investigator with the long-term goal of understanding arrhythmia mechanisms and developing new technologies, leading to more efficacious treatment regimens. Over the next five years the applicant will undergo formal didactic training in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) techniques and clinical investigation. The investigator will be mentored by Dr. Dennis Parker, along with a committee comprised of experts in the field of MRI research, clinical electrophysiology, image processing and biostatistics. Dr. Parker is a leader in the field of MRI research with independent NIH funding and many years of mentoring experience. At the onset of this training program, the research program will be focused on developing MRI visualization techniques to visualize gaps in ablation lesion sets with the goal to test the hypothesis that targeting these gaps acutely will lead to improved outcomes. The success rate for ablation in atrial fibrillation remains persistently low and can require multiple procedures, leaving room for significant improvement. The goal in most of these ablation procedures is to isolate a region with sources of electrical "triggers" from tissue susceptible to such triggers by creating a line of tissue burns or ablation lesions. For such ablation lines to be effective, the lines should have no gaps. Currently, there i no effective means to provide direct proof of successful lines of lesion or ablation and the evaluation of success depends on indirect markers that are often poor predictors. MRI has exceptional capabilities for visualizing soft tissue. These proposed studies aim to develop MRI-based techniques to visualize and evaluate radiofrequency ablation lesions and target gaps in lesion sets. The specific aims for this project are: 1) to determine the smallest gap in ablation lesion sets that can be detected by MRI and then targeted acutely, 2) to test the hypothesis that identifying and targeting gaps acutely will lead to significant improvement in maintaining electrical isolation over time, and 3) to test the hypothesis that gaps detected by MRI in ablation lines will predict electrical reconnection and arrhythmia recurrence in humans. Success in these studies will greatly expand our ability to target gaps in ablation lesion sets acutely leading to improved outcomes from ablation procedures. Moreover, these studies, didactic training in MRI, and clinical investigation and mentoring during this period, will prepare the applicant to pursue rigorous hypothesis testing research. These studies will also form the basis of the next set of studies in animal models of atrial fibrillation, and finally, in humans. We already have a number of species of large animal models of atrial fibrillation as part of another funded project, which makes this research all the more attractive.

## IO1 = Computational Modeling Guided Ablation for Atrial Flutters

> Atypical left atrial flutter (ALAF) is a relatively stable arrhythmia commonly seen in patients after they have undergone ablation for atrial fibrillation. ALAF can be difficult to rate control and frequently requires another ablation. These require extensive mapping to delineate the circuit; there may even be undetectable latent circuits that arise after ablating the dominant one. Mapping is further complicated by very low voltages due to extensive existing scar, making correct local activation time determination very difficult. At times the only solution can be treatment by atrio-ventricular (AV) node ablation and pacemaker implant. ALAF is set up around scar regions in the left atrium. We propose a novel, multidisciplinary approach to managing ALAF in these difficult cases using personalized computational modeling of atrial flutter to guide ablation. Within our atrial arrhythmia group, we have pioneered the use of MRI for measuring atrial structure and scar, developed a wide range of experimental approaches to extend mechanisms of electrophysiology, and applied state-of-the- art scientific computing, all based on highly integrated local resources. We will apply this multidisciplinary expertise to improve the understanding and outcomes of post-ablation ALAF. To achieve this goal, we will (1) use the scar information to make personalized computational models of atrial flutter to identify circuits and provide guidance to ablation, (2) improve MRI segmentation and thresholding accuracy to determine post- ablation scar in patients and (3) use the post ablation MRI and outcomes to determine the mechanistic underpinnings of procedural success and failure in patients who undergo computational model guided ablation for ALAF at the Salt Lake VA. Left atrial late gadolinium enhancement techniques will be improved to acquire isotropic images. Machine learning will be used in our extensive database of thousands of left atrial MRIs at the Salt Lake VA and the Univ of Utah and hundreds of ALAF cases to develop a faster and more accurate segmentation and thresholding technique. Computational model will be used to carry out virtual electrophysiology studies to induce flutter with the goal of identifying all the flutter circuits. Further simulations will be used to test ablation strategies to eliminate all possible left atrial flutters. Our preliminary studies support these goals by achieving successful prediction of arrhythmias from computational models, at times better than the most advanced mapping techniques. The result of this project will be a generalized computational model of ALAF, which can be personalized with left atrial geometry, scar pattern, and mapping results. Such a model will enable virtual electrophysiology studies leading to the prediction of ablation points to terminate all possible ALAF pathways. If successful this will lead to improving outcomes, reducing the need for repeat ablations that have significant cost and risks associated with them and possibly even avoid doing AV node ablation.

## R01 = Improved Imaging of Fibrosis in Atrial Fibrillation

> In the United States, atrial fibrillation (AF) is the second most common cardiovascular condition in adults, after hypertension, affecting 33 million individuals worldwide, with more than 7 million patients in the U.S. and Europe, over 400,000 U.S. hospital admissions per year, 5 million office visits per year, 276,000 emergency room visits per year, a $26 billion annual increase in U.S. healthcare costs, and a five-fold and an almost two- fold increase in the risk of stroke and mortality, respectively. A key marker in the disease process is the collagen and fibrosis formation in the left atrium (LA). MR imaging methods have been developed to assess the left atrium, including fibrosis but are still unreliable and controversial. Specifically, late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) MRI has played a key role as a non-invasive imaging tool for in vivo visualization and quantification of atrial fibrosis. However, the inconsistent image quality and the significant amount of expert- level supervision involved in the fibrosis quantification process are major roadblocks to its reproducibility. This proposal offers a new MRI imaging technique and an associated machine learning approach to better assess the left atrium and to determine the repeatability of these measurements. Aim 1 will introduce robust and repeatable MRI acquisition and reconstruction methods for obtaining isotropic resolution in a fixed time of LGE images of the left atrium. Unique motion compensation models will be integrated into the reconstruction methods for the LGE data. Aim 2 will provide accurate machine learning based methods for segmenting the left atrium wall and assessing atrial myocardium fibrosis. Aim 3 will rigorously test and further refine the non- invasive fibrosis assessment methods in an experimental canine model with fibrosis. Aim 4 will quantify the reproducibility of the new acquisition, reconstruction, and post-processing methods compared to existing methods in patients. This proposal will directly impact clinical science and standards of care in cardiology and AF management through significant improvements to LGE imaging of left atrial fibrosis. Technological contributions of this work will further impact the field of biomedical image analysis through the improvement of MRI-based techniques for imaging cardiac tissue structure. To promote transparency and reproducibility, the proposed efforts will be released as open-source tools consistent with the principles of reproducible research and open science practices. This open-source nature will further make this project a catalyst for future methodological innovations and clinical investigations. Our long-term goal is to streamline and standardize atrial fibrosis quantification for the clinical management of AF patients, and this project will establish the groundwork for achieving this goal.

## R01 = Radiation Guided Ablation for Ventricular Tachycardia

> Ventricular tachycardia can be a life-threatening arrhythmia that requires effective and timely treatment. This treatment often takes the form of catheter based ablation; however, the success rates are modest. Moreover, the ablation procedure is invasive, done under general anesthesia, and can take many hours in patients who already have compromised cardiac function, putting them at risk for more complications. Recently, radiation therapy, like that used in oncology has been used to ablate cardiac arrhythmias. Initially performed in patients who had run out of other options, the success in a few patients has opened the possibility of wider use. However, despite this promising success, the biophysics of how radiation affects the cardiac tissue, the timeline of scar formation, the acute and more chronic effect on the electrical propagation and the dose response are all unknown. The time to response in radiation ablation in the reported studies is also highly variable, ranging from immediate to more than 6 weeks for any results. More importantly, although radiation ablation is non-invasive, it often requires an invasive electrophysiology study to identify the target site(s), an essential step that determines the success or failure of the procedure. We propose to address both these limitations by using our proven expertise in the fields of imaging, electrophysiology, computational modeling, and radiation oncology to advance the use of radiation as a noninvasive means of ablation with the following aims: (1) Determine the dose response and structural and functional effects of radiation on the cardiac tissue; (2) Create radiation targeting strategies using personalized computational models of ventricular arrhythmias in a pre-clinical VT model and patients; (3) Carry out non-invasive radiation ablation treatment in a pre-clinical infarct model with ventricular tachycardia. In aim 1 we will address the biophysics of ablation by performing electrophysiology studies at different time points after ablation with different doses to understand the effects of radiation on electrical propagation. We will be doing serial MRIs to create a dose response and to evaluate the heart for structural remodeling like edema, fibrosis, and scar. To provide a physiological basis for the effects, we will do histology, protein expression analysis and confocal microscopy. In aim 2 we will use MRI to assess patients with pre-existing ventricular scar and make personalized simulation models to determine the VT circuit and the critical part of the circuit to target with radiation. Our existing database of VT patients, with MR images and ECGs with VT and detailed map of the VT will provide the opportunity for validation of these models along with a pre-clinical VT model. Finally, in aim 3 we will treat suitable VT pre-clinical model with radiation instead of the traditional radiofrequency to further understand the mechanism underlying ablation with radiation. Improving our understanding of the effects of radiation treatment for cardiac arrhythmias will fundamentally change the way that patients with VT are managed, shortening procedure times, and reducing the risks associated with invasive traditional ablation.