---
date: 2024-04-11
category: reference
stage: working
tags:
  - research
  - electrophysiology
---

[Sanjiv Narayan](https://reporter.nih.gov/search/xiilbhqxGE6vMN-_0txCBQ/projects) is a professor of medicine at Standford University, and has done extensive EP-related research into computational approaches in atrial fibrillation.
He is extensively [NIH-funded](https://reporter.nih.gov/search/xiilbhqxGE6vMN-_0txCBQ/projects), with projects that overlap with my areas of interest.

# Grants

R01 = Machine Learning in Atrial Fibrillation:

> Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common heart rhythm disorder, affecting 2 million Americans in whom it may cause skipped heart beats, dizziness or stroke. Unfortunately, therapy for AF has limited success, likely because AF represents heterogenous and poorly characterized disease entities between individuals. A central challenge is that it is not clear why a specific therapy works in a given AF patient. This uncertainty makes it challenging to develop a patient-specific approach to tailor therapy for personalized medicine. The premise of this project is that mechanistic data is increasingly available in AF patients at scales spanning tissue, whole heart and patient levels, yet rarely integrated. We set out to use machine learning (ML), a powerful approach proven to classify complex datasets, to integrate data to address 3 clinical unmet needs. First, electrograms are rarely used to guide therapy in AF, unlike organized rhythms, because they are difficult to interpret. Second, it is difficult to understand how arrhythmia is affected by any specific ablation strategy in AF, unlike organized rhythms. This makes it difficult to improve therapy. Third, it is difficult to identify whether an individual patient will or will not have success from AF ablation. We applied machine learning and novel objective analyses to these questions to develop strategies for personalized AF therapy. We have 3 specific aims: (1) To identify components of AF electrograms using ML trained to monophasic action potentials (MAP); (2) To identify electrical and structural features of the acute response of AF to ablation near and remote from PVs; (3) To identify patients in whom ablation is unsuccessful or successful long-term, who are poorly separated at present. Each Aim will compare ML to traditional biostatistics, and use objective explainability analysis of ML to provide mechanistic insights. This study has potential to deliver immediate clinical and translational impact. We will apply specific ML approaches, biostatistics, and computer modeling to our rich multiscale registry. We will develop practical and shareable tools, which we will prospectively test clinically, to deliver meaningful outcomes at tissue, whole heart and patient scales. Our team is experienced in electrophysiology, computer science, signal processing and biological physics. This project is likely to reveal novel multiscale AF phenotypes to enable personalized therapy.

R01 = Machine Learning for Ventricular Arrhythmias:

> Ventricular tachycardia (VT) and fibrillation are leading causes of cardiac arrest, dizziness, syncope and hospitalization in the United States and worldwide. However, the management of patients at risk for VT remains suboptimal despite scientific discoveries from basic to population science. In particular, there is no framework to estimate which patients with VT are likely to respond to anti- arrhythmic medications or ablation. Therapy is thus empirical. There is great excitement to use analysis of “big data” to personalize VT therapy, but this has not yet improved outcomes. This project develops a novel computational approach to personalize VT therapy that combines machine learning in large registries with computational models. Machine learning will be applied to data across biological scales that span bedside, laboratory and non-invasive imaging, to predict which patients are likely to respond to therapy. Computer models will be used to estimate if a given patient's heart is likely to support VT before versus after therapy. We will validate results in large external registries from different Institutions. We have 3 specific aims: (1) To develop a computational pipeline to predict response to VT ablation using bedside, laboratory and non-invasive imaging; (2) To use machine learning of clinical data and non-invasive imaging to identify which patients with VT will respond to anti- arrhythmic medications in a large database; (3) To combine computational approaches to estimate the relative likelihood that a given patient will respond to various forms of therapy. Results from each Aim will be tested in independent external registries. We will probe computational models to identify clinical phenotypes that could be applied at the bedside. This project will provide immediate clinical impact for patients with VT. We will combine machine learning with physics-based computer models in large registries at Stanford and External centers. We will reduce computational bias using FAIR methods (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable), and make tools freely available per the 2018 NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science. Our team comprises experts in clinical and basic electrophysiology, imaging, machine learning, bioengineering and statistics. The project is very feasible.

R01 = The Dynamics of Human Atrial Fibrillation:

> Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a major arrhythmia worldwide, causing palpitations, stroke and mortality, and affecting 2-5 million Americans. Unfortunately, therapy to eliminate AF has had limited success. In our last funding cycle, we focused on localized drivers as potential AF mechanisms. Mapping of drivers has now been validated by concurrent optical mapping of human AF, and their features and have been validated by several other methods in patients. Nevertheless, ablation results for these and other proposed mechanisms for AF outside the pulmonary veins are mixed. It is unclear if this reflects difficulties of AF mapping, or different mechanisms between patients. The project will develop a novel mechanistic framework for AF that simplifies existing indices by building on scientific consensus that organized AF is easier to treat, and disorganized AF has worse prognosis. This concept spans many existing indices and may help to reconcile them. We have 3 specific aims: (1) To define if the impact of ablation depends on the extent of organizing surrounding the ablation site; (2) To establish candidate mechanisms for organized and disorganized AF zones in individual patients with specific profiles, using machine learning applied to known cases with and without ablation success in our large registry. This comprises detailed AF maps during ablation and after Maze surgery, clinical data and outcomes. (3) To use novel clinical tools to predict whether patients will respond to PVI, other ablation or Maze surgery based on whether targeted regions control larger atrial areas and their locations. This study will deliver immediate translational and clinical impact, and directly enable personalized medicine for AF ablation. We use detailed clinical mapping in patients, signal processing and computer modeling to develop a novel mechanistic framework and widely applicable clinical tools. We will use tools including machine learning and statistics to classify mechanisms based upon outcomes from ablation in individual patients. We will make our data and code available online. Our team is experienced in electrophysiology, computer science, machine learning, biological physics and statistics. The proposal is thus highly feasible.

T32 = Computational Medicine in the Heart, Integrated Training Program:

> Cardiovascular (CV) diseases are rising causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. There is excitement that computational medicine, an emerging field combining engineering disciplines with the life sciences, will enable scientific and clinical breakthroughs and accelerate bench-to-bedside translation. However, few training programs exist in this field, and so trainees often learn ad hoc. We seek funding for a new multidisciplinary T32 program in Computational medicine in the Heart: Integrated training Program (CHIP) at Stanford. CHIP will provide cutting-edge training for 3 post-PhD, -MD or -MD/PhD fellows annually, each undergoing 2 years of training at the intersection of engineering, CV physiology and medicine. Trainees will pursue a cutting-edge research project mentored by faculty with complementary expertise in engineering and the life sciences, and select didactic courses to build expertise, grow professionally, and develop community. The forward-looking vision of CHIP addresses key priorities of several National Agencies and fills current gaps in interdisciplinary training. Stanford CHIP leverages faculty and resources at top-ranked Schools of Engineering, Medicine and Humanities and Sciences. The T32 is co-directed by a physician-engineer and an engineer-physiologist, bringing 38 faculty from 13 Departments and Divisions with strong emphasis on women and under - represented minorities. Key support is provided by the inter-disciplinary Cardiovascular Institute (CVI) and the Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering (ICME) at Stanford. Faculty will provide trainees with research opportunities in CV science spanning cell-to-organ and bench-to-bedside, as well as computational science, clinical care, and therapeutic innovation. The faculty are highly collaborative and have exceptional track records of launching trainees into independent scientific careers. Applicant selection and all aspects of the program stress inclusion of trainees from under-represented groups. Trainees will not be required to have backgrounds in both engineering and life sciences. The T32 will provide tailored teaching of CV science to engineers, engineering to life-science fellows, and advanced cross- disciplinary topics to each. Core didactics also include ethics, the responsible conduct of science, methods to ensure reproducibility. Diversity, equity and inclusion are central for trainees and faculty. Evaluation will be both constructive and bidirectional between trainees and faculty. In summary, the CHIP T32 at Stanford provides post-MD, post-PhD and post-MD/PhD graduates with world-class training at the intersection of bioengineering, CV science and medicine. The T32 is well positioned for success due to the co-location of these top-tier resources on a single campus in Silicon Valley, a hub of innovation in data science, artificial intelligence and therapy. Our aspirational goal is that CHIP graduates will become global scientific leaders at the cusp of engineering, physiology and medicine.